
### April 18, 2023

# Class

- now we’ll be showing off our mind maps and i really really don’t want to be the one who will be discussing mine bro please not me bruh please please pretty please just not even look at mind bruh do not do that
- nobody wants to either, so they
- okay, i actually got called out to present my mind map but it was alright though so it wasnt too bad, the bing made it really nice and comprehensive and i just read it all one by one and thats it. answered a few questions and thats it
- Milena was the last one to show her mindmap and it was alright and brief. Ihor also presented his mindmap
- new topic - developing the skills of searching for and processing info and enlarging vocabulary
- kwl chart
    - k know
    - w want to know
    - l learnt
    - this technique usually used when you start working with some topic that you want to know
    
    | What I know | What I want to know |  |
    | --- | --- | --- |
    | involves language processing | how it works under the hood | where is AI used |
    | uses transformer models | how does it process language | why it is important |
    | requires a lot of computational power | how does it learn language | how it can benefit our day-to-day lives |
    | evolves rapidly, probably exponentially | how to properly align it with human values | what is an AI |
    - used in chatbots, history, ethical considerations
    - history of development, general info, the impact of it on the world.
    - how it works, what it is in general, its impact on the world, ethical considerations
- the rest of the class will be dedicated to
- 
    
    Atificial intelligence (AI) is set to be a "defining future technology", but what exactly is AI and how does it already (1) **affect** our lives?
    

AI is the ability of a machine to display human-like (2) **capabilities** such as reasoning, learning, planning and creativity.

[AI enables](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/definition-artificial-intelligence-main-capabilities-and-scientific-disciplines) technical systems to (3) **perceive** their environment, deal with what they perceive, solve problems and act to achieve a specific goal. The computer receives data - already prepared or (4) **gathered** through its own sensors such as a camera - (5) **processes** it and responds.

AI systems are capable of (6) **adapting** their behavior to a certain degree by (7) **analysing** the effects of previous actions and working autonomously.

Researchers are studying how to use AI to analyse large quantities of health data and (1)**discover patterns** that could [[lead]] to new discoveries in medicine and ways to improve individual diagnostics.

For example, researchers developed an AI program for answering emergency calls that promises to recognise a cardiac arrest during the [[call]] faster and more frequently than medical dispatchers. In another example, EU co-funded [KConnect](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/644753) is developing multi-lingual text and search services that help people find the most relevant medical information available.

### **Transport**

AI could improve the safety, speed and efficiency of rail traffic by minimising wheel [[friction]], maximising speed and enabling (2)**autonomous driving**.

### **Manufacturing**

AI can help European manufacturers become more efficient and bring factories back to Europe by using robots in manufacturing, optimising sales paths, or by on-time predicting of maintenance and breakdowns in smart factories.

[SatisFactory](https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/636302), an EU co-funded research project, uses collaborative and augmented-reality systems to increase (3)**work satisfaction** in smart factories.

### **Food and farming**

AI can be used in [creating a sustainable EU food system](https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20200519STO79425/creating-a-sustainable-food-system-the-eu-s-strategy): it can ensure healthier food by minimising the use of fertilisers, pesticides and irrigation; help productivity and reduce the environmental impact. Robots could remove weeds, lowering the use of herbicides, for example. Many farms across the EU already use AI to (4)**monitor the movement**, temperature and feed consumption of their animals.

### **Public administration and services**

Using a wide range of data and (5)**pattern recognition**, AI could provide early warnings of natural disasters and allow for efficient preparation and mitigation of consequences.

What is AI used for

- science and research
- language and image processing
1. Why is AI important?

Some AI technologies have been around for more than 50 years, but advances in computing power, the availability of enormous quantities of data and new algorithms have led to major AI breakthroughs in recent years. Artificial intelligence is seen as central to the digital transformation of society and it has become [an EU priority](https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2019-0081_EN.html?redirect). Future applications are expected to bring about enormous changes, but AI is already present in our everyday lives.

1. Types of AI

Software: virtual assistants, image analysis software, search engines, speech and face recognition systems

"Embodied" AI: robots, autonomous cars, drones, [[Internet]] of Things

1. AI in everyday life

Artificial intelligence is widely used to provide personalised recommendations to people, based for example on their previous searches and purchases or other online behaviour. AI is hugely important in commerce: optimising products, planning inventory, logistics etc.

Search engines learn from the vast input of data, provided by their users to provide relevant search results.

Smartphones use AI to provide services that are as relevant and personalised as possible. Virtual assistants answering questions, providing recommendations and helping organise daily routines have become ubiquitous.

Smart thermostats learn from our behaviour to save energy, while developers of smart cities hope to regulate traffic to improve connectivity and reduce traffic jams.






---

links: [[112b Іноземна мова]]

